docs: add guide doc for flex migration (#9222)
rook/rook: Documentation/flex-to-csi-migration.md

---
title: Migration
weight: 11900
indent: true
---

# Flex to CSI Migration

In Rook v1.8, the Flex driver has been deprecated. Before updating to v1.8, any Flex volumes created in previous versions of Rook will need to be converted to Ceph-CSI volumes.

The tool [persistent-volume-migrator](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator) will help automate migration of Flex rbd volumes to Ceph-CSI volumes.

## Migration Preparation

1. Rook v1.7.x is required. If you have a previous version of Rook running, follow the [upgrade guide](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-upgrade.html) to upgrade from previous releases until on v1.7.x.
2. Enable the CSI driver if not already enabled. See the [operator settings](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/release-1.7/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/operator.yaml#L29-L32) such as `ROOK_CSI_ENABLE_RBD`.
3. Create the CSI storage class to which you want to migrate

> 4. Existing volumes should be dynamically provisioned.

Reviewer: The approach with the flex driver and rbd was to always dynamically provision IIRC. Do we need this line?
```suggestion
4. Volumes must have been dynamically provisioned with the flex driver.
```

Author: right, removed

 Show conversation

> 5. Ceph-CSI storageClass should be created in which you want to migrate

Reviewer: Is this the same as step 3?
```suggestion
```

Author: right, removed

6. Create rbac required to run migrator pod

>    1) `kubectl create -f cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/flex-migration/rbac.yaml`

Reviewer: There is no separate rbac.yaml, right?

Author: right

7. Create migrator pod

>    1) `kubectl create -f cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/flex-migration/migrator.yaml`

Reviewer: Link to the other repo instead?

Reviewer: We also need to wget the binary, right?

Author: yes, added

> **NOTE**: The Migration procedure will come with a downtime; As we need to scale down the applications using the Volumes before migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: The Migration procedure will come with a downtime as we need to scale down the applications using the volumes before migration.
```

## Migrate a PVC
   1) Stop the application pods that are consuming the flex volume(s) that need to be converted.
   2) Connect to migration pod

>       1) `Migration_POD=$(kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod -l app=rook-ceph-migrator -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}')`

Reviewer: maybe it's just me, but how about lower case script names?
```suggestion
      1) `migration_pod=$(kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod -l app=rook-ceph-migrator -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}')`
```

      2) `kubectl -n rook-ceph exec -it "$Migration_POD" -- sh`

>    3) Run command below to migrate single PVC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   3) Run the tool to migrate the PVC
```

>       1) `<binary_name> --pvc=<pvc-name> --pvc-namespace=<pvc-namespace> --destinationstorageclass=<storageclass-name-to-migrate-in> --rook-namespace=<rook-ceph> --ceph-cluster-namespace=<ceph-cluster-namespace>`

Reviewer: Let's move the params and sample output to a new section with its own title below. Then they can see all the steps before they read the detailed section.

      2) `--pvc` :**required**: reads name of the pvc to migrate
      3) `--pvc-namespace` :**required**: reads the namespace of the PVC which is going to migrate
      4) `--destinationstorageclass` :**required**: read the name of the storageclass in which you want mirgrate.

>       5) `-rook-namespace`: reads namespace where rook operator is running. **Defalult** rook-ceph.

Reviewer: Does this param actually have a single or double dash? It's odd being different from the others
```suggestion
      5) `--rook-namespace`: namespace where the rook operator is running. **defalult: rook-ceph**
```

Author: typo

>       6) `--ceph-cluster-namespace`: namespace where ceph cluster is created. **Defalult** rook-ceph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      6) `--ceph-cluster-namespace`: namespace where the ceph cluster is running. **defalult: rook-ceph**
```

         ---
         I1123 07:22:14.574489      65 log.go:34] Cluster connection created
         I1123 07:22:14.574493      65 log.go:34] Delete the placeholder CSI volume in ceph cluster
         I1123 07:22:14.790916      65 log.go:34] Successfully removed volume csi-vol-13c6fe24-4c2e-11ec-a4cf-0242ac110005
         I1123 07:22:14.791196      65 log.go:34] Rename old ceph volume to new CSI volume
         I1123 07:22:14.853310      65 log.go:34] successfully renamed volume csi-vol-13c6fe24-4c2e-11ec-a4cf-0242ac110005 -> pvc-5090804a-585f-46bc-a4df-e5fcda610d5c
         I1123 07:22:14.853331      65 log.go:34] Delete old PV object: pvc-5090804a-585f-46bc-a4df-e5fcda610d5c
         I1123 07:22:14.873745      65 log.go:34] waiting for PV pvc-5090804a-585f-46bc-a4df-e5fcda610d5c in state &PersistentVolumeStatus{Phase:Bound,Message:,Reason:,} to be deleted (0 seconds elapsed)
         I1123 07:22:14.948075      65 log.go:34] deleted persistent volume pvc-5090804a-585f-46bc-a4df-e5fcda610d5c
         I1123 07:22:14.948097      65 log.go:34] successfully migrated pvc rbd-pvc
         I1123 07:22:14.948205      65 log.go:34] Successfully migrated all the PVCs to CSI
       ```

>    4) Start the application pods which was stopped in step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   4) Start the application pods which were stopped in step 1.
```

---
title: Flex Migration
weight: 11900
indent: true
---

# Flex to CSI Migration

In Rook v1.8, the Flex driver has been deprecated. Before updating to v1.8, any Flex volumes created in previous versions of Rook will need to be converted to Ceph-CSI volumes.

The tool [persistent-volume-migrator](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator) will help automate migration of Flex rbd volumes to Ceph-CSI volumes.

## Migration Preparation

1. Rook v1.7.x is required. If you have a previous version of Rook running, follow the [upgrade guide](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-upgrade.html) to upgrade from previous releases until on v1.7.x.
2. Enable the CSI driver if not already enabled. See the [operator settings](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/release-1.7/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/operator.yaml#L29-L32) such as `ROOK_CSI_ENABLE_RBD`.
3. We assume that you have healthy cluster i.e. `ceph status` shows `health: OK`
4. Create the CSI storage class to which you want to migrate
5. Create migrator pod
   1) `kubectl create -f <update this with file link in the tool repo>`

> 6. Download the tool binary

Reviewer: With that approach it makes sense to include the migrator.yaml in the rook repo as well.

> 6. Download the tool binary

Reviewer: The latest discussion is that we can just add the tool to the main rook image in the 1.7 releases. No need to create a new image.

> 6. Download the tool binary

Author: do we still need migrator.yaml file in rook?

   1. `wget <link to  download the binary>`

**NOTE**: The Migration procedure will come with a downtime as we need to scale down the applications using the volumes before migration.

## Migrate a PVC
1. Stop the application pods that are consuming the flex volume(s) that need to be converted.
2. Connect to migration pod
   1. `migration_pod=$(kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod -l app=rook-ceph-migrator -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}')`

   2. `kubectl -n rook-ceph exec -it "$migration_pod" -- sh`
3. Run the tool to migrate the PVC
   1. `<binary_name> --pvc=<pvc-name> --pvc-ns=<pvc-namespace> --destination-sc=<storageclass-name-to-migrate-in> --rook-ns=<rook-ceph> --ceph-cluster-ns=<ceph-cluster-namespace>`
4. Start the application pods which were stopped in step 1.

## Tool settings

> 

Author: done.

1. `--pvc`: **required**: reads name of the pvc to migrate
2. `--pvc-ns`: **required**: reads the namespace of the PVC which is going to migrate
3. `--destination-sc`: **required**: read the name of the storageclass in which you want mirgrate.
4. `--rook-ns`: **optional** namespace where the rook operator is running. **defalult: rook-ceph**.
5. `--ceph-cluster-ns`: **optional** namespace where the ceph cluster is running. **defalult: rook-ceph**.

> 

Reviewer: How about adding a sample command so they can see sample arguments.

Author: added just above sample output

---
title: Flex Migration
weight: 11900
indent: true
---

# Flex to CSI Migration

In Rook v1.8, the Flex driver has been deprecated. Before updating to v1.8, any Flex volumes created in previous versions of Rook will need to be converted to Ceph-CSI volumes.

> The tool [persistent-volume-migrator](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator) will help automate migration of Flex rbd volumes to Ceph-CSI volumes.

Reviewer 2: A note about CephFS not being supported?

Author: added

## Migration Preparation

1. Rook v1.7.x is required. If you have a previous version of Rook running, follow the [upgrade guide](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-upgrade.html) to upgrade from previous releases until on v1.7.x.
2. Enable the CSI driver if not already enabled. See the [operator settings](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/release-1.7/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/operator.yaml#L29-L32) such as `ROOK_CSI_ENABLE_RBD`.
3. Confirm the Rook-Ceph cluster is healthy (`ceph status` shows `health: OK`)
4. Create the CSI storage class to which you want to migrate
5. Create the migrator pod

>    1) `kubectl create -f <update this with file link in the tool repo>`

Reviewer 2: Let's not forget :)

Author: added :smiley:

**NOTE**: The Migration procedure will come with a downtime as we need to scale down the applications using the volumes before migration.

## Migrate a PVC

1. Stop the application pods that are consuming the flex volume(s) that need to be converted.
2. Connect to migration pod
   1. `migration_pod=$(kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod -l app=rook-ceph-migrator -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}')`

   2. `kubectl -n rook-ceph exec -it "$migration_pod" -- sh`
3. Run the tool to migrate the PVC. See the [section below](#migration-tool-options) for more details on the options and the sample output.

>    1. `<binary_name> --pvc=<pvc-name> --pvc-ns=<pvc-namespace> --destination-sc=<storageclass-name-to-migrate-in> --rook-ns=<rook-ceph> --ceph-cluster-ns=<ceph-cluster-namespace>`

Reviewer 2: binary_name is still unknown?

Author: forgot to update. Updated now

4. Start the application pods which were stopped in step 1.

> 

Reviewer 2: unnecessary extra blank line

## Migration Tool Options

> These are the options for converting a single PVC. **For more options**, see the [tool documentation](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator), for example to convert all PVCs automatically that belong to the same storage class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are the options for converting a single PVC. For more options, see the [tool documentation](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator), for example to convert all PVCs automatically that belong to the same storage class.
```

Why was this bold?

Author: The thought was to get more eyes but yeah we can remove too.

1. `--pvc`: **required**: reads name of the pvc to migrate
2. `--pvc-ns`: **required**: reads the namespace of the PVC which is going to migrate
3. `--destination-sc`: **required**: read the name of the storageclass in which you want mirgrate.

> 4. `--rook-ns`: **optional** namespace where the rook operator is running. **defalult: rook-ceph**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. `--rook-ns`: **optional** namespace where the rook operator is running. **default: rook-ceph**.
```

> 5. `--ceph-cluster-ns`: **optional** namespace where the ceph cluster is running. **defalult: rook-ceph**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. `--ceph-cluster-ns`: **optional** namespace where the ceph cluster is running. ** default: rook-ceph**.
```

```console

> pv-migrator --pvc=rbd-pvc --pvc-ns=default --destination-sc=csi-rook-ceph-block

Reviewer 2: now the know the binary name?

---
title: Flex Migration
weight: 11900
indent: true
---

# Flex to CSI Migration

In Rook v1.8, the Flex driver has been deprecated. Before updating to v1.8, any Flex volumes created in previous versions of Rook will need to be converted to Ceph-CSI volumes.

The tool [persistent-volume-migrator](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator) will help automate migration of Flex rbd volumes to Ceph-CSI volumes.

> **Note** Migration of CephFS FlexVolumes is not supported for now.

## Migration Preparation

> 1. Rook v1.7.x is required. If you have a previous version of Rook running, follow the [upgrade guide](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-upgrade.html) to upgrade from previous releases until on v1.7.x.

Reviewer: Let's go ahead and mention the latest release, then we can update the recommendation with each 1.7.x release as well
```suggestion
1. Rook v1.7.8 is required. If you have a previous version of Rook running, follow the [upgrade guide](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.7/ceph-upgrade.html) to upgrade from previous releases until on v1.7.8.
```

Author: changed

2. Enable the CSI driver if not already enabled. See the [operator settings](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/release-1.7/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/operator.yaml#L29-L32) such as `ROOK_CSI_ENABLE_RBD`.
3. Confirm the Rook-Ceph cluster is healthy (`ceph status` shows `health: OK`)
4. Create the CSI storage class to which you want to migrate
5. Create the migrator pod

>    1) `kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator/main/manifests/migrator.yaml`

Reviewer 2: Should we point to an alpha or stable release?

Author: right, added link to alpha release.

>    1) `kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator/v0.1.0-alpha/manifests/migrator.yaml`

Reviewer: This yaml appears to pull in rook v1.7.8, which wouldn't include the migrator binary. Is the plan still to include the binary with the rook 1.7.x release? Until then, I don't see how these instructions will work. And if that's still the plan , let's include the migrator.yaml in the rook repo since its version would be tied to the rook image release.

Author: We discussed that we'll add the binary in 1.7.x release. so this means I'll add the migrator.yaml here also and update the above line accordingly?

Reviewer: Agreed, and to re-target this PR to release-1.7, thanks

>    1) `kubectl create -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator/v0.1.0-alpha/manifests/migrator.yaml`

Reviewer: How about you update this doc as if #9274 is merged? After that is merged and we can merge this doc after further testing.

Author: changed according to pr 9274.

**NOTE**: The Migration procedure will come with a downtime as we need to scale down the applications using the volumes before migration.

## Migrate a PVC

> 1. Stop the application pods that are consuming the flex volume(s) that need to be converted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Stop the application pods that are consuming the flex volume(s) that need to be converted. For example, scale the application deployment down to 0: `kubectl scale --replicas=0 deploy/<name>`
```

2. Connect to migration pod
   1. `migration_pod=$(kubectl -n rook-ceph get pod -l app=rook-ceph-migrator -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}')`

   2. `kubectl -n rook-ceph exec -it "$migration_pod" -- sh`
3. Run the tool to migrate the PVC. See the [section below](#migration-tool-options) for more details on the options and the sample output.

>    1. `pv-migrator --pvc=<pvc-name> --pvc-ns=<pvc-namespace> --destination-sc=<storageclass-name-to-migrate-in> --rook-ns=<rook-ceph> --ceph-cluster-ns=<ceph-cluster-namespace>`

Reviewer: In the example, let's not include optional arguments. They can look below for more details.
```suggestion
   1. `pv-migrator --pvc=<pvc-name> --pvc-ns=<pvc-namespace> --destination-sc=<storageclass-name-to-migrate-in>`
```

> 4. Start the application pods which were stopped in step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Start the application pods which were stopped in step 1. For example, scale the application deployment back up: `kubectl scale --replicas=1 deploy/<name>`
```

## Migration Tool Options

These are the options for converting a single PVC. For more options, see the [tool documentation](https://github.com/ceph/persistent-volume-migrator), for example to convert all PVCs automatically that belong to the same storage class.

> 1. `--pvc`: **required**: reads name of the pvc to migrate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. `--pvc`: **required**:  name of the pvc to migrate
```

Author: done

> 2. `--pvc-ns`: **required**: reads the namespace of the PVC which is going to migrate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. `--pvc-ns`: **required**: namespace in which the target PVC is present.
```

> 3. `--destination-sc`: **required**: read the name of the storage class in which you want to migrate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. `--destination-sc`: **required**: name of the ceph-csi storage class in which you want to migrate.
```

> 3. `--destination-sc`: **required**: read the name of the storageclass in which you want mirgrate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. `--destination-sc`: **required**: read the name of the storage class in which you want to migrate.
```

I1125 07:56:22.259115      63 log.go:34] List all the PVC from the source storageclass
I1125 07:56:22.261205      63 log.go:34] 1 PVCs found with source StorageClass
I1125 07:56:22.261221      63 log.go:34] Start Migration of PVCs to CSI
I1125 07:56:22.261226      63 log.go:34] migrating PVC "rbd-pvc" from namespace "default"
I1125 07:56:22.261229      63 log.go:34] Fetch PV information from PVC rbd-pvc
I1125 07:56:22.266734      63 log.go:34] PV found "pvc-30a01887-8821-4baf-835c-16a7e55ba7f0"
---
I1125 07:56:26.483172      63 log.go:34] successfully renamed volume csi-vol-2f8de58f-4dc5-11ec-a130-0242ac110005 -> pvc-30a01887-8821-4baf-835c-16a7e55ba7f0
I1125 07:56:26.483194      63 log.go:34] Delete old PV object: pvc-30a01887-8821-4baf-835c-16a7e55ba7f0
I1125 07:56:26.504578      63 log.go:34] waiting for PV pvc-30a01887-8821-4baf-835c-16a7e55ba7f0 in state &PersistentVolumeStatus{Phase:Bound,Message:,Reason:,} to be deleted (0 seconds elapsed)
I1125 07:56:26.702921      63 log.go:34] deleted persistent volume pvc-30a01887-8821-4baf-835c-16a7e55ba7f0
I1125 07:56:26.702944      63 log.go:34] successfully migrated pvc rbd-pvc

> I1125 07:56:26.703335      63 log.go:34] Successfully migrated all the PVCs to CSI

Reviewer: If only one PVC is being migrated, the tool should skip printing this line, it was confusing.
```suggestion
```

Author: this I'll need to change in tool side first. will open PR

Author: We need to log something after successful migration. How about this 
1. `Successfully migrated flex PVCs to CSI`
2. `Migration done successfully`

Reviewer: The message for individual PVC names seems sufficient. Or instead of saying "all" PVCs, how about printing the number of PVCs converted?

```

> After running above command you should see something similar to this output.

Reviewer: Let's add a cleanup section to tell them to remove the migrator.yaml when they are done.

Author: added.
